# Phylogenetic estimation of contact network parameters with kernel-ABC

When modelling the spread of HIV in a population, it is often assumed that the
population is homogeneously mixed, or is divided into homogeneously mixed
compartments. True susceptible populations are much more highly structured, and
this structure can have a significant influence on the speed and pattern of
epidemic spread. Contact networks capture this structure by explicitly
representing each possible transmission pair. We developed a tree kernel-based
approximate Bayesian computation (kernel-ABC) method for estimating parameters
of the contact network underlying an observed HIV transmission tree, and used
it to investigate the preferential attachment power parameter of the
Barabasi-Albert network model. To validate the method, transmission trees were
simulated over networks with low edge density and preferential attachment power
values of 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5; these were re-estimated by our method as X [IQR
X-X], X [X-X], and X [X-X] respectively. Our estimates of the number of
infected nodes in these networks were uninformative (X [X-X], true value =
1000), although the accuracy improved when applied to networks with higher edge
density (X [X-X]). We applied the method to a viral phylogeny relating a
cluster of 399 HIV infections in Vancouver, British Columbia, and estimated the
preferential attachment power of the underlying contact network as X (X-X). Our
results indicate that certain contact network parameters are estimable using
kernel-ABC, and our method provides a framework for future investigation of
other network models.
